Gentle Splendour1
Praises to the Great Abbot Śāntarakṣita
by Mipham Rinpoche

jampal pawö shyabpé drimé nyi
While the bodhisattva Mañjuśrī’s pristine lotus feet
yenlak chok gi pemar rab kö né
Remained elegantly poised atop a perfect lotus,
zabgyé chö tsul ngö su lek nöpa
You perfectly trained in the Dharma, profound and vast —
khenchen shyiwatso la chaktsal tö
Mahāpaṇḍita Śāntarakṣita, to you I offer homage and praise.

tenpé tsawa sosor tarpa yi
Pure, you hold the saffron victory banner,
tsultrim namdak ngurmik gyaltsen chang
The pratimokṣa discipline, the root of the teachings.
domtsön denö dzinpé gyalpor ngak
Renowned as the sovereign scripture-holding observer of vows —
shakyé sé chik khyé la chaktsal tö
Only son of Śākya, to you I offer homage and praise.

zab yang tingdzin gyatso chenpö long
Within the ocean-like expanse of profound and vast samādhi
ngönshé lasok yönten norbü ter
Lies the treasure box of qualities — clairvoyance and more,
gyalsé chöpé lab treng cher yowa
Floating amidst the rolling waves of bodhisattva conduct —
changchub sempé chok la chaktsal tö
Supreme Bodhisattva, to you I offer homage and praise.

shyalja denpa nyi kyi chö tsul kün
Along the path of perfect reasoning,
yangdak rikpé lam né sal dzepé
Where all dharmas accord with the twofold truth of valid cognition,
sherab nyidé ö kyi sateng khyab
Your intelligence pervades the world, like the light of the sun and moon —
khepé wangpo khyé la chaktsal tö
Fount of Learning, to you I offer homage and praise.

rangshyen drubta gyatsö parol chin
Crossing the ocean of Buddhist and non-Buddhist views,
u sem zungjuk shingté lam sol ché
You unified the approach of Madhyamaka and Cittamātra,
pakpé yul na nyida tabur drak
Renowned like the sun and moon throughout the noble land of India —
tenpé gyen chik khyé la chaktsal tö
Single Gem of the Teachings, to you I offer homage and praise.

gangchen münpé trö du gyalten chok
In the dark abode of the Snowy Land,
nangwé gochen tokmar khyö kyi ché
You were the first to open the door to the light of the Buddha’s supreme teachings,
yangdak lung dang rikpé gyal nga drak
Sounding the royal drum of genuine scripture and reasoning —
khenchen chö kyi gyalpor chaktsal tö
Great Abbot, King of Dharma, to you I offer homage and praise.

drangja gyatrak gu yi drang shyuk té
Remaining for nine hundred years
pakyul gyanak gangchen lasokpar
In the noble land of India and the snows of Tibet,
tenpé gyaltsen chok chur rabtu dreng
You hoisted in every quarter the victory banner of the teachings —
tendzin gyalpo khyé la chaktsal tö
Royal Holder of the Teachings, to you I offer homage and praise.

mejung tukkyé mönlam gyatso dang
With marvellous bodhicitta you made an ocean of aspirations,
tab la khepé namrol natsok kyi
And with skilful means in elaborate display
zangpö trinlé sateng küntu khyab
You spread excellent activity throughout the entire world —
kadrin drenmé khyé la chaktsal tö
Matchless Kindness, to you I offer homage and praise.

tutob dakpor gyur kyang jam tsé ngang
Master of powerful magic, out of kindness and love
yönten gyatsö yor kyang nyemmé shyi
You grew rich in an ocean of qualities, yet were mild and humble,
sang ngak salam dzok kyang gejong tsul
You perfected the path of secret mantra, yet maintained the conduct of a bhikṣu —
men nam jesu dzin la chaktsal tö
Follower of Humble Bearing, to you I offer homage and praise.

bö dir gyalten jisi né kyi bar
For as long as the Buddha’s teachings remain in Tibet
trulpé tendzin yangyang jönpa dang
Emanations will come again and again to uphold and spread the Dharma,
ten la jawa jepar shyal gyi shyé
Resolute in their work on behalf of the teachings —
gangchen gönpo khyé la chaktsal tö
Protector of the Snowy Land, to you I offer homage and praise.

gang ku gompé tenpé ngatang pel
For whoever meditates on your form, it is said that the teachings’ domain will flourish,
tsultrim namdak tingdzin sherab gyé
Pure discipline, samādhi, and intelligence will bloom,
tar gyi dorjé dzin gyal gyur shyé sung
And the state of Vajra-Wielding Victor will ultimately be attained —
pakmé tukjé ter la chaktsal tö
Treasury of Immeasurable Compassion, to you I offer homage and praise.

dü tar gyalwé tenpa nyam ma shying
You promised that in the final days, when the teachings are cast aside
ten jejuk nam shintu nyamtak tsé
And followers of the Dharma are in an abject state,
khyé nyi drenpé kyobpar gyur ro shyé
By recalling you we will be protected —
shyalshyé jesu dren no tukjé chen
Compassionate One, remember your pledge!

dengdü nyikma ngé chom drowa nam
Now, during this plundering age of the five degenerations,
yangdak tawé miknam nyé ka shying
Without the nectar of discipline and samādhi,
tsultrim tingdzin dütsi kalwé wen
Beings struggle to find the doctrine of the authentic view,
ten la tsewé chok nam ché cher do
And those who wish to harm the teachings only grow in number.

charden dü zang dzokpé nam shyuk shyin
When, like the favourable summer rains that come to an early end,
chi la sam kyang kyowé dü di na
However carefully we plan, there is only failure —
gyal kün tutob wangchuk dorjé dzin
Then, ever-victorious powerful Lord, vajra-wielding Protector,
gönpo khyö kyi damcha ma nyel chik
Never forget your pledge!

denö gyüdé chenyen darwa dang
Spread the study and teaching of the scriptures and tantras,
lab sum rim nyi naljor gong du pel
Nurture the three trainings and the two stages of yoga,
lungtok tenpé ngatang rabgyé pé
Increase the dominion of the Dharma of learning and realization —
dzokden dü zang sar du ngompar dzö
So that a new era of perfect excellence may arise!

kyewa küntu khyé kyi jezung né
In each of my lives, may I be your disciple,
gyalwa gyepé lam lé mi yo shying
Never wavering from the path which delights the buddhas.
tayé drowa kün kyang gyal kün gyi
May each and every being, infinite in number,
sang dzin sangwé dakpo nyi gyur chik
Become the Master of Secrets, holding the secrets of the Victors.

These verses, equal in number to the sixteen aspects of the Four Truths of the Noble Ones, were
written down in the year of the Male Fire Horse, on the fifth lunar day of the ninth month,2
by Mipham Jampel Gyepa. May virtue and excellence flourish!

| Lhasey Lotsawa Translations, 2018. (Translated by Stefan Mang and Kaleb Yaniger. Edited by
Libby Hogg.)
↑ Lit. Mañjuśrī
↑ Monday 22nd October, 1906.