The Tree of Awakening
A Prayer to the Great Abbot Śāntarakṣita
by Jamyang Khyentse Chökyi Lodrö

gönpo jampé yang la güpé chaktsal lo
In devotion, I pay homage to the protector Mañjughoṣa!

gyalrik sala tabü gyü trung shing
Born into the sāla-like lineage of the kṣatriyas,
rigpé né nga tarchin jamyang kyi
You mastered the five sciences and honoured Mañjughoṣa,
shyab kyi pemö zé'u dru chiwö ten
Offering the crown of your head for his lotus feet—
khenchen changchub sempar solwa deb
Great bodhisattva abbot, to you I pray.

kal mang gong né shyenpen tukkyé kyi
With your altruistic resolve formed many aeons ago
tsawa ser dram tabu rabten pé
As an utterly stable foundation like finest gold,
tsödü ten dang drowé nyen chikpu
You are the sole ally of the teachings and beings in this age of turmoil—
khenchen shyiwatso la solwa deb
Great abbot Śāntarakṣita, to you I pray.

sangye ten la khuwé mutek kyi
Like a mighty skull-crushing vajra elephant, you defeated
langchen tsuk gem wangpö dorjé tar
The tīrthikas who were hostile to the teachings of the Buddha
dratsé umé rikpé chom dzepé
In grammar and logic and through Middle Way reasoning —
mawé sengé chenpor solwa deb
Great lion of speech, to you I pray.

chö dul ser gyi riwor ten ché shing
Upon the foundation of Vinaya teachings, like a golden mountain,
zab ching gyaché dodé dön rabsal
You fully elucidated the meaning of the Sūtras, profound and vast,
chö ngön gyatsö chen tong nampar tra
And beheld the ocean-like Abhidharma as if with a thousand eyes—
khenchen lha yi lamar solwa deb
Great bodhisattva, guru to the gods, to you I pray.

tsultrim dri yi lhar ché dro nam ga
The sweet scent of your discipline delighted all including the devas,
tingdzin zab mö zakmé yönten dü
Your profound meditative absorption brought undefiled qualities,
sherab pobpé chö kyi go gya jé
And your wisdom and courageous eloquence opened a hundred Dharma doors—
dzamling tubwang nyipar solwa deb
Second lord of sages for this world of Jambudvīpa, to you I pray.

jangchok gangri trengwé korwé jong
You brought the chariot of the teachings of the Śākya Lion
shakya sengé tenpé shingta dren
To this northern land encircled by a chain of snowy peaks,
denö sum la chi gar longchö pé
So that we may readily avail ourselves of the Three Piṭakas—
kadrin nyammé jé la solwa deb
Lord of unparalleled kindness, to you I pray.

gyalwé lung gi tenpé khenpo ni
To the abbot prophesied by the victorious buddha,
bhodhi sato shanta rakshi ta
Bodhisattva Śāntarakṣita,
tamché khyen ngö tönpé gyaltsab cher
Omniscient in actuality, great regent of the Teacher,
dé mö tsechik güpé solwa deb
With single-pointed faith and devotion, I pray.

kha tsam mayin nying né soldeb na
As I pray to you—not with empty mouthing but from the depths of my heart,
tenpa rinchen chok chur pelwa dang
Grant your blessings so that the precious teachings spread in all directions,
tsulden düpa gyatsö yong gang shying
Everywhere is flooded with ocean-like communities of the ethical,
go sum nampar dakpar jingyi lob
And my three doors of body, speech and mind are made utterly pure.

| Translated by Adam Pearcey with the generous support of the Khyentse Foundation and Tertön
Sogyal Trust, 2021.

Source: 'Jam dbyangs chos kyi blo gros. “mkhan chen gsol 'debs byang chub ljon shing/" in ’Jam
dbyangs chos kyi blo gros kyi gsung ’bum. 12 vols. Bir: Khyentse Labrang, 2012. W1KG12986
Vol. 3: 78–79